# TryElseExpression

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1003                                                            |
| Author:         | [Sophie Kirschner](https://github.com/pineapplemachine)         |
| Implementation: | n/a                                                             |
| Status:         | Draft                                                           |

## Abstract

The way D currently handles operator overloading limits how far user-defined types are able to diverge from builtin numeric types in their behavior. The most common use cases are compatible with and are simplified by how operator overloading is currently handled, and the current operator overloading behavior should remain tenable while also becoming more flexible.

### Links

- [D2 operator overloading](http://dlang.org/spec/operatoroverloading.html)
- [D1 operator overloading](http://digitalmars.com/d/1.0/operatoroverloading.html)

## Description

### Current behavior

There is currently one method used to overload unary operators, and it is `opUnary`.

There are several methods used to overload binary operators. They are `opBinary`, `opBinaryRight`, `opCmp`, and `opEquals`.

The postfix increment and decrement operators are currently always rewritten in terms of their prefix siblings as implemented by `opUnary`. Equality is defined by `opEquals` and inequality is rewritten in terms of the equality operator. Other comparison operators are defined by `opCmp`. All other binary operators are defined by `opBinary`, when the implementing type is the left operand, and `opBinaryRight`, when the implementing type is the right operand and the left operand does not itself have an applicable override.

### Proposed change

The proposed change is to allow prefix and postfix operators to optionally be independently defined, and for comparison, equality, and inequality operators to optionally be implemented using new templated methods which behave similarly to `opBinary` and `opBinaryRight`.

### Unary operator overloading

A new operator overload, `opUnaryPostfix`, would be introduced. When no `opUnaryPostfix` is defined, the current unary operator overloading would be retained: Where increment and decrement operators are defined for `opUnaryPrefix`, `opUnaryPostfix` would be given a default implementation which behaves identically to current postfix operations:

``` D
auto opUnaryPostfix(string op)() if(op == `++` || op == `--`){
    auto t = this;
    this.opUnary!op;
    return t;
}
```

Whether the `opUnaryPostfix` method should be able to overload postfix unary operators other than `++` and `--` is a matter of discussion, and I am unsure which is the better option.

It may be desireable to deprecate `opUnary` in favor of instead naming the method `opUnaryPrefix`, so that it does not become unclear which override applies to which unary operators. 

### Comparison operator overloading

Though there are arguments for being able to implement comparison operators using `opBinary` and `opBinaryRight`, falling back to them only when `opCmp` or `opEquals` are not implemented, allowing this could open existing code to unclear errors when working with existing code that does implement these overrides but does not implement either `opCmp` or `opEquals`.

Two new operator overloads, `opCompare` and `opCompareRight`, would be introduced. They would behave identically to `opBinary` and `opBinaryRight`, except while the `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `^^`, `&`, `|`, `^`, `<<`, `>>`, `>>>`, `~`, and `in` operators would remain the purview of `opBinary`, the operators `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `==`, and `!=` would be handled by `opCompare`.

Where implemented, `opCompare` would have priority over `opCmp` and `opEquals` when resolving operator overloads, but it would still be legal for a type to implement the methods in any combination.

This change should not entail the deprecation of either `opCmp` or `opEquals` considering classes are not currently able to define virtual templated methods, which these methods are not and `opCompare` and `opCompareRight` would necessarily be.

An example of a type implementing `opCompare` to override comparison operators:

``` D
struct Type{
    int value;
    auto opCompare(string op)(Type rhs){
        mixin(`return this.value ` ~ op ~ ` rhs.value;`);
    }
    auto opCompare(string op)(int rhs){
        mixin(`return this.value ` ~ op ~ ` rhs;`);
    }
    auto opCompareRight(string op)(int lhs){
        mixin(`return lhs ` ~ op ~ ` this.value;`);
    }
}
```

### Rationale

Users of D have expressed a desire to have more flexibility in the ways that comparison expressions are evaluated, especially in the context of DSLs. For example, other languages allow queries to external data sources to be constructed using operator overloads. Similar patterns are allowed in D for binary operators excluding comparison, but making these patterns possible for all operators will contribute to usability for application logic.

With the current behavior of `opUnary`, this class does not behave as one would expect:

``` D
class Test
{
    int value;
    this(int value)
    {
        this.value = value;
    }
    auto opUnary(string op: `++`)()
    {
        ++this.value;
        return this;
    }
}
```

It produces this behavior:

``` D
auto t = new Test(0);
auto x = t; // x.value == 0 (good)
auto y = ++t; // y.value == 1 (good)
auto z = t++; // z.value == 2 (bad)
```

If prefix and postfix operators were separately overloaded using `opBinaryPostfix`, the behavior could be corrected like so:

``` D
class Test
{
    int value;
    this(int value)
    {
        this.value = value;
    }
    auto opUnary(string op: `++`)()
    {
        ++this.value;
        return this;
    }
    auto opUnaryPostfix(string op: `++`)()
    {
        auto t = new typeof(this)(this.value);
        ++this.value;
        return t;
    }
}
```

Which would produce this behavior:

``` D
auto t = new Test(0);
auto x = t; // x.value == 0 (good)
auto y = ++t; // y.value == 1 (good)
auto z = t++; // z.value == 1 (good)
```

Note that this behavior cannot be achieved by overloading the deprecated opPostInc and opPostDec operator overloads; they are superseded by opUnary.

### Examples

None at this time.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

### Reviews
